---
author: timolaak
date: 2022-02-26T11:44:15+11:00
slug: 'from-pandemic-to-war'
title: 'From Pandemic to War'
tags:
  - ukrainian
  - black metal
draft: false
---

{{< youtube I4dFZu-yyXE >}}

A while ago, many of us were eager to finally witness the end of the pandemic.
To have the opportunity and privilege to travel again, to see the world, explore
new cities and get immersed in new cultural experiences. And not just that, but
to bring security to the world economy. Get the businesses booming and value of
your investment portfolios increasing. To feel the future being a little bit
more secure than it has been during the past 2 years.

How wrong we were. So wrong.

The events in Eastern Europe today echo the message of 1930s very loudly. It is
so easy to compare Crimea of 2014 to Sudetenland in 1938 and Ukraine of 2022 to
Poland in 1939. We are all horrified as no war of this scale has happened in
Europe since 1945.

Even though it is said that _history repeats itself_, I think that in reality
things are a little bit more complicated than that and we simply shouldn't try
to predict the next move based on only historical events.

Now, let me get one thing straight first. By saying Russia, I mean the Russian
state controlled by Kremlin. Many ordinary Russian people are opposing this war
as much as we are. They are equally shocked and horrified but they are also
afraid of the consequences if they voice their discontent. Please don't point
your anger towards them. There is already enough hatred in the world.

A few years ago, I read a book called
[Prisoners of Geography](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/25135194-prisoners-of-geography),
written by a former journalist and author
[Tim Marshall](https://www.goodreads.com/author/show/713466.Tim_Marshall). This
book gives some insights to the importance of geography in warfare and defense.
The land from Northern Germany across Poland, Belarus and the Baltic States to
St Petersburg and Moscow is mostly flat. There aren't tall mountains, huge
rivers or any impenetrable natural obstacles to slow down or stop the advance of
invading armies. Same applies to Ukraine. It is very flat terrain from Black Sea
all the way to Moscow. Who controls these lands, can simply drive their tanks to
Moscow and make the Russian capital fall (probably easier said than done).

The only way for Moscow to stay secure is to have this territory under their own
control &mdash; either directly or indirectly through loyal allies. When the
enemy has to travel through thousands of kilometres of hostile territory to
reach their targets, the service lines are simply far too long and vulnerable
for their armies to survive the campaign. Add the brutal Russian winter in the
mix and you may have a chance to save Moscow. Napoleon and Hitler learned this
the hard way.

When the Soviet Union collapsed and Russia was weak, Poland and the Baltic
States joined the EU and NATO as soon as they could. They knew from history that
Russia cannot be trusted and the geography of their terrain also works for their
own disadvantage by being hard to defend. Ukraine wanted to do the same, but
Russia of today simply cannot allow it to happen. 20 years ago the situation
might have been different.

I am quite certain that Kremlin knows NATO isn't going to invade them today,
this year or even next year, if ever. They just cannot know who is going to be
leading the USA, France or Germany in the future. The situation might change and
when it changes, it's too late to fix it.

If you've read other books focussing on the current masters of Kremlin (e.g. by
[Luke Harding](https://www.goodreads.com/author/show/4606582.Luke_Harding)), you
might know that it's not just about protecting Russia, but about the wealth and
the fortunes of the Kremlin cronies. Authoritarian states are often based on
personality cults and kleptocracy where the elite hoards the fortunes of the
businesses and people in their own coffers. Meanwhile they control the majority
if not all of the media to create a polished image of themselves as benefactors,
protectors and the saviours of the people and their country, while suppressing
the critique. The world will never become any better place if we let people like
this to gain power.

If these leaders lose their power, they also lose their wealth and in most
cases, they will lose their heads. It is incredibly unlikely for a foreign enemy
to invade and take over a country possessing a nuclear weapons arsenal and one
of the strongest armies in the world. The real threat comes from within. People
might turn against their leaders and start a revolution. Competing likeminded
kleptocrats may want to take over and get rid of the old regime. While the
Soviet Union was considered a global superpower, Russian economy is not really
significant on a global scale, making Russia only a regional power if looked
only from the GDP perspective. There is a lot of inequality and poverty,
crumbling infrastructure and worsening conditions for the residents. Many
freedoms have been gradually taken away during the past 10 years. Elections will
mean nothing as their results are constantly manipulated. This will make the
people angry and dissatisfied. Leaders know that if they become the targets of
this contempt, the days of their reign are eventually numbered. That's when the
foreign enemy often steps into the picture as an attempt to show the power of
the leaders and how only they can protect the country and its people.

I don't believe western powers can do much to resolve this situation other than
make the voices from within Russia grow louder and louder. It will mean that
many innocent people will suffer but that is always the price of war and we all
know who is the guilty one behind this war. I don't believe there will be peace
until Putin's era comes to an end. Russian people will have to take over the
streets and start a revolution to achieve that. The response from the regime
will be brutal and merciless but it wouldn't be the first Russian revolution.

That's what Putin and his cronies are really afraid of.
