---
author: timolaak
date: 2023-01-08T14:24:22+11:00
slug: 'wrapping-up-2022'
title: 'Wrapping Up 2022'
tags:
  - progressive metal
draft: false
---

{{< youtube LQJ-e75ZSj8 >}}

Hello, folks! It’s been a while since my last post. Those who know me in real
life should know that our family grew from 2 to 3 in July 2022. Getting a baby
boy has changed many things in our lives, and routines now revolve around the
little one.

This hasn’t stopped us from going out every now and then, but we’re usually
heading home relatively early. Babies must be in bed around 8 pm, and public
places like restaurants become uncomfortably noisy very quickly when people have
had a couple of drinks.

We also took one short road trip to Katoomba in the Blue Mountains and another
longer one to Brisbane, driving 2,200 km within six days. For Christmas, we flew
to Adelaide to see the in-laws. Travelling with our baby has been easy. He’s a
good traveller and falls asleep as soon as the car starts moving, or the plane
takes off. So I’m pretty confident about taking him on an intercontinental
flight to introduce him to the other side of the family and friends in Europe.

## Let’s talk about work a little bit

In work news, it’s been a frustrating and exhausting ride. I’m in my third job
within one year, as the previous ones have not been great fits. Finding a job
hasn’t been that hard but finding a job that would offer me an excellent
foundation to maintain and grow my skills has been quite hard. The working
culture in Australia is somewhat similar to the UK, but the management style
seems more top-down than I’m comfortable with. I appreciate leading by example
and building things together as a team, not being told what to do and then
getting blamed for doing it wrong after the manager changed their mind.
Micromanagement should have no place in modern software engineering.

The pay is good, though, and it’s been somewhat easy to find the same salary
level I had in the UK. Senior software engineers are paid well in Australia, so
if you’re looking for a change of scenery, why not consider moving Down Under?

The pandemic killed all the meet-ups, and some have slowly revived during the
last six months. However, the offering is still way quieter than in London or
Berlin. Sydney is a city of 5.25 million people, and I had assumed the tech
communities would be more active.

Twitter has been the primary platform for keeping in touch with my tech buddies
for years. It’s been my main source of information, the coolest new libraries,
technologies and the general direction of web development. Now it’s been
destroyed, and the communities have escaped to greener pastures elsewhere. Some
fled to Mastodon, and some have put more effort into their personal websites and
newsletters. Some have decided to stay in their bubbles. A considerable amount
of information is also buried in Discord servers, out of reach of public search
engines.

Sometimes I think I could do something entirely different for a living. I just
haven’t yet figured out what that would possibly be. In my dreams, I want to
write a book. I have already drafted a rough plot line, although it needs more
work. With this pace, it might take years before I’m happy with the outcome. On
the other hand, many famous authors wrote their first books in their 40s or even
50s, and I think it’s never really too late.

## Projection to 2023

I have no idea what 2023 will bring. The Russian invasion in Ukraine is still
ongoing. China is constantly testing the defence capabilities of its neighbours,
increasing its influence in the Pacific, and its military is becoming stronger.
Climate change has not been stopped, and to be honest, I don’t believe our
generation can stop it. So things don’t look too promising, but that’s how it’s
always been. When I was a child, Chernobyl blew up, the Cold War was at its
peak, and the threat of nuclear war was always imminent.

We’ve been somewhat happy in Sydney, but the housing crisis with ever-increasing
rents makes this city a very expensive place to live. Moving further away from
the city is tempting, but we also want to live a social life and go to pubs,
cafes, museums, concerts and festivals, which only happen in the city.

Three years of La Niña is ending, which reduces the amount of rain, but the
opposite effect of El Niño is likely to take over. That means hotter and dryer
weather, more drought and bushfires. Not exactly better. We already knew that
when we decided to move to Australia, and we’re okay with it. I like the
sunshine and the mild winters.

We’ll see what the future brings to us.
